 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

CHAPTER 7 

INSTRUMENTATION AND CONTROLS 

7.1 

Introduction 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

The instrumentation and control systems presented in this chapter provide protection against 
unsafe reactor operation during steady-state and transient power operations. They initiate selected 
protective functions to mitigate the consequences of design basis events. This chapter relates the 
functional performance requirements, design bases, system descriptions, and safety evaluations for 
those systems. The safety evaluations show that the systems can be designed and built to conform 
to the applicable criteria, codes, and standards concerned with the safe generation of nuclear 
power. 

Because of the rapid changes that are taking place in the digital computer and graphic display 
technologies employed in a modern human system interface, design certification of the AP1000 
focuses upon the process used to design and implement instrumentation and control systems for 
the AP1000, rather than on the specific implementation. The design specifics provided here are 
included as an example for illustration. 

DCD Chapter 7 for the AP1000 has been written to describe the protection system hardware 
utilizing the Common Qualified Platform (Common Q) described in Reference 8 (which includes 
the NRC SER), and augmented by Reference 2. The I&C functional requirements of the AP600, 
which has received Design Certification, have been retained to the maximum extent compatible 
with the Common Q hardware and software. 

The terminology used for Chapter 7 is intended to be independent of any product, but when this is 
not possible, Common Q terminology is used. 

This  chapter  also  discusses  the  instrumentation  portions  of  the  safety-related systems which 
function to achieve the system responses assumed in the accident analysis, and those needed to 
shutdown the plant. Section 7.1 describes the AP1000 instrumentation and control architecture, 
with specific emphasis on the protection and safety monitoring system. The plant control system is 
discussed briefly. Other systems are discussed in more detail in relevant sections or chapters. 
Section 7.2 discusses the reactor trip function, and Section 7.3 addresses the engineered safety 
features (ESF). Systems required for safe shutdown are discussed in Section 7.4 in support of 
other chapters. Safety-related display instrumentation is discussed in Section 7.5 and interlocks 
important to safety are presented in Section 7.6. Control systems and the diverse actuation system 
are discussed in Section 7.7. 

Definitions 

Terminology used in this chapter reflects an interdisciplinary approach to safety-related systems 
similar to that proposed in IEEE 603 (Reference 1). 

Safety System – The aggregate of electrical and mechanical equipment necessary to mitigate the 
consequences of design basis events. 

 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-1 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

Protection  and  Safety  Monitoring  System  –  The  aggregate  of  electrical  and  mechanical 
equipment which senses generating station conditions and generates the signals to actuate reactor 
trip  and  ESF,  and  which  provides  the  equipment  necessary  to  monitor  plant  safety-related 
functions during and following designated events. 

Protective Function – Any one of the functions necessary to mitigate the consequences of a 
design basis event. Protective functions are initiated by the protection and safety monitoring 
system  logic  and  will  be  accomplished  by  the  trip  and  actuation  subsystems.  Examples  of 
protective functions are reactor trip and engineered safety features (such as valve alignment and 
containment isolation). 

Actuated Equipment – The assembly of prime movers and driven equipment used to accomplish 
a protective function (such as solenoids, shutdown rods, and valves). 

Actuation Device – A component that directly controls the motive power for actuated equipment 
(such as circuit breakers, relays, and pilot valves). 

Division – One of the four redundant segments of the safety system. A division includes its 
associated sensors, field wiring, cabinets, and electronics used to generate one of the redundant 
actuation signals for a protective function. It also includes the power source and actuation signals. 

Channel – One of the several separate and redundant measurements of a single variable used by 
the  protection  and  safety  monitoring  system  in  generating  the  signal  to  initiate  a  protective 
function. A channel can lose its identity when it is combined with other inputs in a division. 

Degree of Redundancy – The number of redundant channels monitoring a single variable, or the 
number of redundant divisions which can initiate a given protective function or accomplish a 
given  protective  function.  Redundancy  is  used  to  maintain  protection  capability  when  the 
safety-related system is degraded by a single random failure. 

System-Level Actuation – Actuation of a sufficient number of actuation devices to effect a 
protective function. 

Component-Level Actuation – Actuation of a single actuation device (component). 

7.1.1 

The AP1000 Instrumentation and Control Architecture 

Figure 7.1-1 illustrates the instrumentation and control architecture for the AP1000. The figure 
shows  two  major  sections  separated  by  the  real-time  data  network.  Figure  7.1-1  depicts  the 
real-time data highway as a single network.  
 
The lower portion of the figure includes the plant protection, control, and monitoring functions. At 
the lower right-hand side is the protection and safety monitoring system. It performs the reactor 
trip functions, the engineered safety features (ESF) actuation functions, and the Qualified Data 
Processing (QDPS) functions. The I&C equipment performing reactor trip and ESF actuation 
functions, their related sensors, and the reactor trip switchgear are, for the most part, four-way 
redundant.  This  redundancy  permits  the  use  of bypass logic so that a division or individual 

 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-2 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

channel out of service can be accommodated by the operating portions of the protection system 
reverting to a two-out-of-three logic from a two-out-of-four logic. 

The ESF coincidence logic performs system-level logic calculations, such as initiation of the 
passive residual heat removal system. It receives inputs from the plant protection subsystem 
bistables and the main control room. 

The ESF actuation subsystems provide the capability for on-off control of individual safety-related 
plant loads. They receive inputs from the ESF coincidence logic, remote shutdown workstation 
and the main control room. 

The plant control system performs nonsafety-related instrumentation and control functions using 
both discrete (on/off) and modulating (analog) type actuation devices. 

The nonsafety-related real-time data network, which horizontally divides Figure 7.1-1, is a high 
speed,  redundant  communications  network  that  links systems of importance to the operator. 
Safety-related systems are connected to the network through gateways and qualified isolation 
devices so that the safety-related functions are not compromised by failures elsewhere. Plant 
protection, control, and monitoring systems feed real-time data into the network for use by the 
control room and the data display and processing system. 

The upper portion of the figure depicts the control rooms and data display and processing system. 
The main control room is implemented as a set of compact operator consoles featuring color 
graphic displays and soft control input devices. The graphics are supported by a set of graphics 
workstations that take their input from the real-time data network. An advanced alarm system, 
implemented in a similar technology, is also provided. 

The  data  display  and  processing  (plant  computer)  system  is  implemented  in  a  distributed 
architecture. The working elements of the distributed computer system are graphics workstations, 
although their graphics capability is secondary to their computing performance. The distributed 
computer system obtains its input from the real-time data network and delivers its output over the 
network to other users. 

WCAP-15775 (Reference 7) describes the diversity and defense-in-depth features of the AP1000 
instrumentation and control architecture. 

Protection and Safety Monitoring System 

The protection and safety monitoring system provides detection of off-nominal conditions and 
actuation of appropriate safety-related functions necessary to achieve and maintain the plant in a 
safe shutdown condition. The protection and safety monitoring system controls safety-related 
components  in  the  plant  that  are  operated  from  the  main  control  room  or  remote  shutdown 
workstation. Secure development and operational environments for the protection and safety 
monitoring system are used during design as described in Reference 22. 
 
In addition, the protection and safety monitoring system provides the equipment necessary to 
monitor  the  plant  safety-related  functions  during  and  following  an  accident  as  required  by 
Regulatory Guide 1.97. 

 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-3 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

Special Monitoring System 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

The special monitoring system does not perform any safety-related or defense-in-depth functions. 
The  special  monitoring  system  consists  of  specialized  subsystems  that  interface  with  the 
instrumentation and control architecture to provide diagnostic and long-term monitoring functions. 

The  special  monitoring  system  is  the  metal  impact  monitoring  system.  The  metal  impact 
monitoring system detects the presence of metallic debris in the reactor coolant system when the 
debris  impacts  against  the  internal  parts  of  the  reactor  coolant  system.  The  metal  impact 
monitoring system is composed of digital circuit boards, controls, indicators, power supplies and 
remotely located sensors and related signal processing devices. A minimum of two sensors are 
located  at  each  natural  collection  region,  connected  to  separate instrumentation channels, to 
maintain the impact monitoring function if a sensor fails in service. The metal impact monitoring 
system is described in subsection 4.4.6.4. 

Plant Control System 

The plant control system provides the functions necessary for normal operation of the plant from 
cold  shutdown  through  full  power.  The  plant  control  system  controls  nonsafety-related 
components  in  the  plant  that  are  operated  from  the  main  control  room  or  remote  shutdown 
workstation. 

The plant control system contains nonsafety-related control and instrumentation equipment to 
change reactor power, control pressurizer pressure and level, control feedwater flow, and perform 
other plant functions associated with power generation. The plant control system is described in 
subsections 7.1.3 and 7.7.1. 

Diverse Actuation System 

The diverse actuation system is a nonsafety-related, diverse system that provides an alternate 
means of initiating reactor trip and actuating selected engineered safety features, and providing 
plant information to the operator. The diverse actuation system is described in subsection 7.7.1.11. 

Operation and Control Centers System 

The operation and control centers system includes the main control room, the technical support 
center,  the  remote  shutdown  room,  emergency  operations  facility,  local  control  stations  and 
associated workstations for these centers. With the exception of the control console structures, the 
equipment in the control room is part of the other systems (for example, protection and safety 
monitoring system, plant control system, data display and processing system). 

The boundaries of the operation and control centers system for the main control room and the 
remote shutdown workstation are the signal interfaces with the plant components. These interfaces 
are via the plant protection and safety monitoring system processor and logic circuits, which 
interface with the reactor trip and ESF plant components; the plant control system processor and 
logic circuits, which interface with the nonsafety-related plant components; and the plant real-time 
data network, which provides plant parameters, plant component status, and alarms. 

 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-4 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

Data Display and Processing System 

The data display and processing system provides the equipment used for processing data that 
result in nonsafety-related alarms and displays for both normal and emergency plant operations, 
generating  these  displays  and  alarms,  providing  analysis  of  plant  data,  providing  plant  data 
logging and historical storage and retrieval, and providing operational support for plant personnel. 

The data display and processing system also contains the real-time data network, which is a 
redundant  data  highway  that  links  the  elements  of  the  AP1000  instrumentation  and  control 
architecture. 

Incore Instrumentation System 

The primary function of the incore instrumentation system is to provide a three-dimensional flux 
map of the reactor core. This map is used to calibrate neutron detectors used by the protection and 
safety monitoring system, as well as to optimize core performance. A secondary function of the 
incore instrumentation system is to provide the protection and safety monitoring system with the 
thermocouple signals necessary for the post-accident inadequate core cooling monitor. The incore 
instrument assemblies house both fixed incore flux detectors and core exit thermocouples. The 
incore instrumentation system is described in subsection 4.4.6.1. 

7.1.2 

Protection and Safety Monitoring System 
 
Reference  19,  Section  2.1  provides  an  overview  description  of  the  protection  and  safety 
monitoring system. 

7.1.2.1 

Plant Protection Subsystems 

Reference 19, Section 2.2 describes the plant protection subsystems. 

7.1.2.1.1  Reactor Trip Functions 

Reference 19, Section 1.1 describes the reactor trip functions. 

7.1.2.1.2  Reactor Trip Switchgear Interface 

Reference 19, subsection 2.2.3.1.1 describes the reactor trip switchgear interface. 

7.1.2.1.3  Manual Reactor Trip 

Reference 19, subsection 2.2.3.1.3 describes the manual reactor trip. 

7.1.2.2 

Engineered Safety Features Coincidence Logic 

Reference 19, subsection 2.2.3.2.1 describes the Engineered Safety Features Coincidence Logic. 

 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-5 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

7.1.2.3 

Engineered Safety Features Actuation Subsystems 

Reference  19,  subsection  2.2.3.2.2  describes  the  Engineered  Safety  Features  Actuation 
Subsystems. 

7.1.2.4 

Reactor Trip Switchgear 

Reference 19, subsection 2.2.3.1.1 describes the reactor trip switchgear. 

7.1.2.5 

Qualified Data Processing Subsystems 

Reference 19, Section 4.2 describes the Qualified Data Processing Subsystems (QDPS). 

7.1.2.6 

Main Control Room Multiplexers 

The protection and safety monitoring system does not use multiplexers to provide a signal path 
between the protection system equipment and the main control room. Each division’s safety 
display communicates with the protection system equipment via that division’s communications 
network as shown in Figure 2-2 of Reference 19. 

7.1.2.7 

Sensors 

The  protection  and  safety  monitoring  system  monitors  key  variables  related  to  equipment 
mechanical limitations, and variables directly affecting the heat transfer capability of the reactor. 
Some limits, such as the overtemperature ΔT setpoint, are calculated in the plant protection 
subsystem from other parameters because direct measurement of the variable is not possible. This 
subsection provides a description of the sensors which monitor the variables for the protection and 
safety  monitoring  system.  For  convenience  the  discussions  are  grouped  into  the  following 
three categories: 

Process sensors 

• 
•  Nuclear instrumentation detectors 
Status inputs from field equipment 
• 

The  inputs  described  are  those  required  to  generate  the  initiation  signals  for  the  protective 
functions. The use of each parameter is discussed in the sections that deal with each protective 
function. For example, reactor trip is discussed in Section 7.2 and ESF actuation is described in 
Section 7.3. 

7.1.2.7.1  Process Sensors 

The process sensors are devices which measure temperature, pressure, fluid flow, and fluid level. 
Process instrumentation excludes nuclear and radiation measurements. 

Additional information on these process variables is included as part of the description of each 
process system provided in other chapters. The process variables measured by the protection and 
safety monitoring system are listed in Sections 7.2, 7.3, and 7.5. 

 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-6 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

7.1.2.7.2  Nuclear Instrumentation Detectors 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

Three types of neutron detectors are used to monitor the leakage neutron flux from a completely 
shutdown condition to 120 percent of full power. The intermediate range channels are capable of 
measuring overpower excursions up to 200 percent of full power. 

The lowest range (source range) covers six decades of leakage neutron flux. The lowest observed 
count rate depends on the strength of the neutron sources in the core and the core multiplication 
associated with the shutdown reactivity. This generally is greater than two counts per second. The 
next range (intermediate range) covers eight decades. Detectors and instrumentation are chosen to 
provide overlap between the higher portion of the source range and the lower portion of the 
intermediate range. The highest range of instrumentation (power range) covers approximately 
two decades of the total instrumentation range. This is a linear range that overlaps the higher 
portion of the intermediate range. The neutron detectors are installed in tubes located around the 
reactor vessel in the primary shield. Detector types for these three ranges are: 

• 
• 
• 

Source range – proportional counter or pulse fission chamber 
Intermediate range – pulse fission chamber 
Power range – uncompensated ionization chamber 

7.1.2.7.3  Equipment Status Inputs 

Some inputs to the protection system are not measurements of process or nuclear variables, but are 
discrete indications of the status of certain equipment. Examples include manual switch positions, 
contact status inputs, and indications provided by valve limit switches. 

7.1.2.8 

Communication Functions 

Reference 19, Section 3, and Reference 25 describe the communication functions. 
 
Fault Tolerance, Maintenance, Test, and Bypass 

7.1.2.9 

Reference  19,  Section  7  describes  the  fault  tolerance  features,  and  Section  6  describes  the 
maintenance, test, and bypass features of the protection and safety monitoring system. 

7.1.2.10 

Isolation Devices 

Isolation devices are used to maintain the electrical independence of divisions, and to prevent 
interaction between nonsafety-related systems and the safety-related system. 

Isolation  devices  are  incorporated  into  selected  interconnections  to  maintain  division 
independence. Isolation devices serve to prevent credible faults (such as open circuits, short 
circuits, or applied credible voltages) in one circuit from propagating to another circuit. 

 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-7 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

7.1.2.11 

Test Subsystem 

Reference 19, Section 6 describes the test subsystem. 

7.1.2.12 

Safety-Related Display Instrumentation 

Safety-related display instrumentation provides the operator with information to determine the 
effect of automatic and manual actions taken following reactor trip due to a Condition II, III, or IV 
event as defined in Chapter 15. This instrumentation also provides for operator display of the 
information necessary to meet Regulatory Guide 1.97. A description of the equipment used to 
provide this function is provided in subsection 7.1.2.5. A description of the data provided to the 
operator by this instrumentation is provided in Section 7.5. 

7.1.2.13  Auxiliary Supporting Systems 

The  safety-related  system  equipment  is  supported  by  the  supply of uninterruptible electrical 
power.  This  electrical  power  is  supplied  by  the  Class  1E  dc  and  UPS  system  discussed  in 
Chapter 8. 

7.1.2.14  Verification and Validation 

[Adequacy of the hardware and software is demonstrated for the protection and safety monitoring 
system through a verification and validation (V&V) program. Details on the verification and 
validation program are provided in WCAP-16096-NP-A (Reference 9).]* WCAP-16096-NP-A 
defines a software development process consistent with appropriate industry standards. 

7.1.2.14.1  Design Process 

[WCAP-16096-NP-A (Reference 9) provides a planned design process for software development 
during life cycle stages: 

•  Conceptual phase (may also be referred to as design requirements phase) 

• 

Requirements phase (may also be referred to as system definition phase) 

•  Design phase (may also be referred to as hardware and software development phase) 

• 

• 

• 

Implementation phase (may also be referred to as hardware and software development 
phase) 

Test phase (may also be referred to as system integration and test phase) 

Installation and checkout phase (may also be referred to as installation phase) 

WCAP-16096-NP-A  (Reference  9),  WCAP-15927  (Reference  20),  and  NRC-approved 
Westinghouse Quality Management System (Reference 21) describe design processes that will be 
used for AP1000.]*  
 

*NRC Staff approval is required prior to implementing a change in this information; see DCD Introduction Section 3.5. 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-8 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

Reference  22  describes  the  process  for  ensuring  that  the  design  life  cycle  process  for  the 
protection and safety monitoring system meets the computer security requirements of IEEE 603 
and Regulatory Guide 1.152.  

The planning (or design requirements) phase documents are listed below. Figure 7.1-2 shows the 
relationship of the same documents. 

Document 1:  WNA-PN-00043-WAPP, NuStart/DOE Design Finalization Program” 

Document 2:  WNA-PQ-00201-WAPP, NuStart/DOE Design Finalization Program Project 

Quality Plan” 

Document 3:  WNA-PN-00045-WAPP,  NuStart/DOE  Design  Finalization  Protection  and 

Safety Monitoring System Project Plan” 

Document 4:  WNA-PD-00042-WAPP,  NuStart/DOE  Design  Finalization  Protection  and 

Safety Monitoring System Software Development Plan” 

Document 5:  WCAP-16096-NP-A, “Software Program Manual for Common Q Systems” 

Document 6:  NABU-DP-00014-GEN, “Design Process for Common Q Safety Systems” 

Document 7:  WNA-PV-00009-GEN, “Verification & Validation Process for the Common Q 

Safety Systems” 

Document 8:  WNA-PT-00058-GEN, “Testing Process for Common Q Safety Systems” 

Document 9:  NABU-DP-00015-GEN,  “Common  Q  Software  Configuration  Management 

Guidelines” 

Document 10:  00000-ICE-3889, “Coding Standards & Guidelines for Common Q Systems” 

Document 11:  APP-PMS-GER-020, “Protection and Safety Monitoring System Concept Phase 

V&V Summary Report” 

Document 12:  APP-PMS-T5-001,  “AP1000  Protection  and Safety Monitoring System Test 

Plan” 

Document 13:  WCAP-15927, “Design Process for AP1000 Common Q Safety Systems” 

Document 14:  APP-GW-J0R-012,  “AP1000TM  Protection  and  Safety  Monitoring  System 

Computer Security Plan” 

Document 15:  APP-GW-GLR-143,  “AP1000TM  Component  Interface  Module  Technical 

Report” 

 

 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-9 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

7.1.2.14.2  Commercial Dedication 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

[WCAP-16097-P-A (Reference 8) provides for the use of commercial off-the-shelf hardware and 
software through a commercial dedication process.]* Control of the hardware and software 
during the operational and maintenance phase is the responsibility of the Combined License 
applicant as described in subsection 13.5.1. 

7.1.3 

Plant Control System 

The plant control system is a nonsafety-related system that provides control and coordination of 
the plant during startup, ascent to power, power operation, and shutdown conditions. The plant 
control system integrates the automatic and manual control of the reactor, reactor coolant, and 
various reactor support processes for required normal and off-normal conditions. The plant control 
system  also  provides  control  of  the  nonsafety-related  decay  heat  removal  systems  during 
shutdown. The plant control system accomplishes these functions through use of the following: 

•  Rod control 
• 
• 
• 
•  Rapid power reduction 

Pressurizer pressure and level control 
Steam generator water level control 
Steam dump (turbine bypass) control 

The plant control system provides automatic regulation of reactor and other key system parameters 
in  response  to  changes  in  operating  limits  (load  changes).  The  plant  control  system  acts  to 
maximize margins to plant safety limits and maximize the plant transient performance. The plant 
control system also provides the capability for manual control of plant systems and equipment. 
Redundant control logic is used in some applications to increase single-failure tolerance. 

The plant control system includes the equipment from the process sensor input circuitry through to 
the modulating and nonmodulating control outputs as well as the digital signals to other plant 
systems. Modulating control devices include valve positioners, pump speed controllers, and the 
control rod equipment. Nonmodulating devices include motor starters for motor-operated valves 
and pumps, breakers for heaters, and solenoids for actuation of air-operated valves. The plant 
control system cabinets contain the process sensor inputs and the modulating and nonmodulating 
outputs. The plant control system also includes equipment to monitor and control the control rods. 

The functions of the plant control system are performed by system assemblies including: 

Signal selector algorithms 

•  Distributed controllers 
• 
•  Operator controls and indication 
•  Real-time data network 
•  Rod control system 

*NRC Staff approval is required prior to implementing a change in this information; see DCD Introduction Section 3.5. 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-10 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

•  Rod position indication 
•  Rod drive motor-generator sets 

7.1.3.1 

Distributed Controllers 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

Each distributed controller processes inputs, performs system-level and component-level control 
calculations, provides capability for an operator interface to the controlled components, transmits 
control  signals  to  discrete,  modulating,  and  networked  interfaced  control  components,  and 
provides plant status and plant parameter information to the real-time data network. 

The  distributed  controllers  receive  process  inputs  and  implement  the  system-level  logic  and 
control algorithms appropriate for the plant operating mode. The distributed controllers receive 
process  inputs  from,  and  transmit  process  control  outputs  to,  the  actuated  components.  The 
distributed controller also transmits and receives process signals via the real-time data network. 
The real-time data network also provides for two-way communication between the distributed 
controllers  and  between  the  distributed  controllers  and  the  main  control  room  and  remote 
shutdown workstation. 

Control functions are distributed across multiple distributed controllers so that single failures 
within  a  controller do not degrade the performance of control functions performed by other 
controllers. The major control functions which are implemented in different distributed controllers 
include reactor power control, feedwater control, pressurizer control, and turbine control. 

7.1.3.2 

Signal Selector Algorithms 

Signal selector algorithms provide the plant control system with the ability to obtain inputs from 
the protection and safety monitoring system. The signal selector algorithms select those protection 
system signals that represent the actual status of the plant and reject erroneous signals. Therefore, 
the control system does not cause an unsafe control action to occur even if one of four redundant 
protection channels is degraded by random failure simultaneous with another of the four channels 
bypassed for test or maintenance. 

Each signal selector algorithm receives data from each of the redundant divisions of the protection 
and safety monitoring system. The data is received from each division through an isolation device. 

The signal selector algorithms provide validated process values to the plant control system. They 
also provide the validation status, the average of the valid process values, the number of valid 
process values, an alarm (if one process value has been rejected), and another alarm (if two 
process values have been rejected). 

For  the  logic  values  received  from  the  protection  and  safety  monitoring  system,  such  as 
permissives, two-out-of-four (2/4) voting is used to provide a valid logic value to the plant control 
system.  

The signal selection algorithm is executed in the PLS, and the results are not available to PMS or 
DAS. Therefore, PMS and DAS performance, controls, and displays are independent of the signal 
selector algorithm. 
 

 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-11 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

7.1.3.3 

Operator Controls and Indication 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

The plant control operator interface is a set of soft control devices that replace conventional 
switch/light or potentiometer/meter assemblies used for operator interface with control systems. 
These soft control devices provide consistent operator interfaces for the plant control system. The 
soft controls are located on each operator workstation and the remote shutdown workstation. Each 
soft control device can control safety-related and nonsafety-related equipment. 

The implementation of the soft controls is consistent with the following functional requirements: 

• 

• 

The  soft  control  function  does  not  affect  the  electrical  or  functional  isolation  of  the 
safety-related and nonsafety-related equipment. This isolation is maintained upon a single 
failure of any equipment performing or supporting the soft control function. 

Failure  of  the  operator displays does not prevent an operator from being able to safely 
shutdown the plant. 

When  the  operator  desires  to  operate  a  component,  the  graphical  operator  display  which  is 
indicating the component status is presented on the operator control console. This results in a 
message being sent to the soft control device. The soft control device then displays the appropriate 
control template. The operator then selects the desired control action on the template. After the 
operator verifies that the desired control action is properly selected, the operator then actuates the 
control action, causing the selected control action to be transmitted to the control device. 

7.1.3.4 

Real-Time Data Network 

The real-time data network is a redundant data highway that supports both periodic and aperiodic 
data transfers of nonsafety-related signals and data. Periodic transfers consist of process data that 
is broadcast over the network at fixed intervals and is available to all destinations. Aperiodic data 
transfer is generally used for messages or file transfers. 

The real-time data network provides communications among the distributed controllers, the plant 
protection and safety monitoring system gateways, the incore instrumentation, and the special 
monitoring system. 

7.1.3.5 

Rod Control System 

The primary means of regulating the reactor power and power distribution is to position clusters of 
control rods in the reactor core using the rod control system. 

The control rods are moved into and out of the reactor core by means of electromagnetic jacking 
mechanisms, called control rod drive mechanisms, located on the reactor vessel head. Each control 
rod drive mechanism consists of two gripper mechanisms, one stationary and one movable, that 
hold a notched driveline attached to the upper end of the control rod. The grippers and the lift 
armature are controlled by coils mounted external to the mechanism, concentric with the rod 
driveline. By controlling the sequence of energizing these coils, the mechanism can be made to 
step into, or out of, the reactor in increments. The rod control equipment provides this sequence 
control. 

 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-12 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

The control rods are arranged into symmetrical groups. The groups of control rods are divided into 
two categories: shutdown rods that are normally held fully withdrawn from the reactor, and 
control rods that are positioned to some intermediate insertion. In addition, there is a subcategory 
of control rods (low worth gray rods). If a rapid shutdown is necessary, the control, shutdown, and 
gray rods are dropped into the reactor by de-energizing their drive mechanisms. 

Interlocks are provided to prevent the motion of the control rods outside of planned sequences. 

7.1.3.6 

Rod Position Indication 

The position of each control rod is continuously monitored by the rod position indication system. 
This  information  is  detected  by  the  rod  position  detector  assemblies.  The  signals  from  the 
detectors are processed by the data cabinets and transmitted to the distributed controllers. The 
distributed controllers further process the rod position information and transmit this information to 
the real-time data network. 

7.1.3.7 

Rod Drive Motor-Generator Sets 

The rod drive motor-generator sets provide the power to the control rod drive mechanisms through 
the reactor trip switchgear. The rod drive motor-generator sets are included in the plant control 
system. The safety-related reactor trip switchgear is included in the plant protection and safety 
monitoring system. 

There are two motor-generator sets with flywheels and one control cabinet. Each motor-generator 
is a three-phase induction motor, direct-coupled to a flywheel, and a synchronous alternator. 

During  normal  operating  conditions,  both  motor  generator sets are operating in parallel and 
equally sharing the total load demand. Each motor-generator set is capable of supplying the entire 
load requirements when the other set is out of service. 

7.1.4 

Identification of Safety Criteria 

7.1.4.1 

Conformance of the Safety System Instrumentation to Applicable Criteria 

The safety-related system instrumentation described in subsection 7.1.1 is designed and built to 
conform to the applicable criteria, codes, and standards concerned with the safe generation of 
nuclear power. Applicable General Design Criteria are listed in Section 3.1, NRC Regulatory 
Guides  in  subsection  1.9.1,  and  Branch  Technical  Positions  in  subsection  1.9.2.  Industry 
Standards are cited as references. 

The instrumentation and control portion of the safety-related system meets the requirements of 
IEEE 603-1991 as discussed in WCAP-15776 (Reference 12). The topics are listed in the same 
order as they appear in Sections 4 through 8 of IEEE 603-1991. IEEE 603 provides the design 
bases of the instrumentation and control portion of the safety system. Other criteria related to the 
IEEE 603-1991 requirements are also identified. 

 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-13 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

7.1.4.2 

Conformance With Industry Standards 

The instrumentation and control systems are designed in accordance with guidance provided in 
applicable portions of the following standards. The portions of the standards which are considered 
to be applicable are the portions of the standards which apply to instrumentation and control 
systems performing protection and control functions in an industrial environment: 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

IEEE 323-1974; “IEEE Standard for Qualifying Class IE Equipment for Nuclear Power 
Generating Stations” 

IEEE  344-1987;  “IEEE  Recommended  Practice  for  Seismic  Qualification  of  Class  1E 
Equipment for Nuclear Power Generating Stations” 

IEEE 379-2000; “IEEE Standard Application of the Single-Failure Criterion to Nuclear 
Power Generating Station Safety Systems” 

IEEE 383-1974; “IEEE Standard for Type Test of Class IE Electric Cables, Field Splices, and 
Connections for Nuclear Power Generating Stations” 

IEEE 384-1981; “IEEE Standard Criteria for Independence of Class 1E Equipment and 
Circuits” 

IEEE 420-1982; “IEEE Standard for the Design and Qualification of Class 1E Control 
Boards, Panels, and Racks Used in Nuclear Power Generating Stations” 

IEEE 603-1991; “IEEE Standard Criteria for Safety Systems for Nuclear Power Generating 
Stations” 

IEEE 627-1980; “IEEE Standard for Design Qualification of Safety Systems Equipment 
Used in Nuclear Power Generating Stations” 

IEEE 1050-1996; “IEEE Guide for Instrumentation and Control Equipment Grounding in 
Generating Stations” 

IEEE 1074-1995; “IEEE Standard for Developing Software Life Cycle Processes” 

EPRI TR-102323, Revision 1, “Guidelines for Electromagnetic Interference Testing in Power 
Plants” 

7.1.5 

AP1000 Protective Functions 

Protective functions are those necessary to achieve the system responses assumed in the safety 
analyses, and those needed to shut down the plant safely. The protective functions are grouped 
into two classes, reactor trip and ESF actuation. The software associated with these functions is 
considered a basic component as defined in 10 CFR 21 (Reference 6). 

Reactor trip is discussed in Section 7.2. ESF actuation is discussed in Section 7.3. 

 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-14 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

7.1.6 

Combined License Information 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

7.1.6.1 

 

The Combined License information requested in this subsection is addressed in WCAP-16361-P 
(Reference 17), and the applicable changes are incorporated into the DCD. The Westinghouse 
Setpoint  Control  Program  (SCP)  will  be  incorporated  into  the  AP1000  DCD  Technical 
Specifications in accordance with COL/DC-ISG-8. This will facilitate combined license (COL) 
applicants’ adoption of the AP1000 DCD Technical Specifications. Prior to initial fuel load, a 
reconciliation of the setpoints against the final design for each plant will be performed. 

The following words represent the original Combined License Information Item commitment, 
which has been addressed as discussed above: 

Combined  License  applicants  referencing  the  AP1000  certified  design  will  provide  a 
calculation of setpoints for protective functions consistent with the methodology presented in 
Reference 5.  Reference  5  is  an  AP600  document  that  describes  a  methodology  that  is 
applicable to AP1000. AP1000 has some slight differences in instrument spans. 

7.1.6.2 

The Combined License information requested in this subsection has been completely addressed in 
APP-GW-GLR-017 (Reference 18), and the applicable changes are incorporated into the DCD. 
No additional work is required by the Combined License applicant. 

The following words represent the original Combined License Information Item commitment, 
which has been addressed as discussed above: 

Combined  License  applicants  referencing  the  AP1000  certified  design  will  provide 
resolution for generic open items and plant-specific action items resulting from NRC review 
of the I&C platform. This will include definition of a methodology for overall response time 
testing. 

7.1.7 

References 

1. 

2. 

IEEE 603-1991, “IEEE Standard Criteria for Safety Systems for Nuclear Power Generating 
Stations.” 

[WCAP-17201-P, Revision 0, “AC160 High Speed Link Communication Compliance to 
DI&C-ISG-04 Staff Positions 9, 12, 13 and 15,” February 2010.]* 

3.  Not used. 

4.  Not used. 

5.  WCAP-14605 (Proprietary) and WCAP-14606 (Non-Proprietary), “Westinghouse Setpoint 

Methodology for Protection Systems, AP600,” April 1996. 

6.  10 CFR 21, “Reporting of Defects and Noncompliance.” 

7.  WCAP-15775,  “AP1000  Instrumentation  and  Control  Defense-in-Depth  and  Diversity 

Report.”  

 

*NRC Staff approval is required prior to implementing a change in this information; see DCD Introduction Section 3.5. 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-15 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

8. 

9. 

[WCAP-16097-P-A 
Revision 0, “Common Qualified Platform,” May 2003.]* 

(Proprietary) 

and  WCAP-16097-NP-A 

(Non-Proprietary), 

[WCAP-16096-NP-A, Revision 01A, “Software Program Manual for Common Q Systems,” 
December  2004.]* 

10.  Not used. 

11.  Not used. 

12.  WCAP-15776,  “Safety  Criteria  for  the  AP1000  Instrument  and  Control  Systems,” 

April 2002. 

13.  Not used. 

14.  Not used. 

15.  IEEE 7-4.3.2-1993, “IEEE Standard Criteria for Digital Computers in Safety Systems of 

Nuclear Power Generating Stations.” 

16.  Not used. 

17.  WCAP-16361-P  (Proprietary)  and  WCAP-16361-NP  (Non-Proprietary),  “Westinghouse 

Setpoint Methodology for Protection Systems – AP1000,” February 2011. 

 
18.  APP-GW-GLR-017, AP1000 Standard Combined License Technical Report, “Resolution of 

Common Q NRC Items,” Westinghouse Electric Company LLC. 

19.  WCAP-16675-P (Proprietary) and WCAP-16675-NP (Non-Proprietary), “AP1000 Protection 

and Safety Monitoring System Architecture Technical Report,” Revision 5. 

20.  [WCAP-15927, Revision 2 (Non-proprietary), “Design Process for AP1000 Common Q 

Safety Systems,” November 2008.]* 

 
21.  Westinghouse  Electric  Company  Quality  Management  System  (QMS),  Revision  5 

(Non-Proprietary), October 1, 2002. 

22.  APP-GW-J0R-012, “AP1000 Protection and Safety Monitoring System Computer Security 

Plan,” Revision 1, Westinghouse Electric Company LLC. 

 
23.  WCAP-17184-P, “AP1000™ Diverse Actuation System Planning and Functional Design 

Summary Technical Report.” 

24.  [WCAP-17179-P  (Proprietary)  and  WCAP-17179-NP  (Non-Proprietary),  “AP1000 

Component Interface Module Technical Report,” Revision 2.]* 

25.  WCAP-16674-P (Proprietary) and WCAP-16674-NP (Non-Proprietary), “AP1000 I&C Data 

Communication and Manual Control of Safety Systems and Components,” Revision 4. 

*NRC Staff approval is required prior to implementing a change in this information; see DCD Introduction Section 3.5. 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-16 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

 
 
Tier 2 Material 

 

Figure 7.1-1 

Instrumentation and Control Architecture 

7.1-17 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

 
 
Tier 2 Material 

 

Figure 7.1-2 

Common Q Standard Process and AP1000 Project-Specific Documents 

7.1-19 

Revision 19 

 
 
7.  Instrumentation and Controls 

AP1000 Design Control Document 

 

 

Figures 7.1-3 through 7.1-11 not used. 

 
 
Tier 2 Material 

7.1-20 

Revision 19 

